[[jdbcescape]]
[appendix]
== Supported JDBC Scalar Functions

*TODO* Needs updating with support improved in Jaybird 3 and 4

The JDBC API supports the escaped syntax for numeric, string, time,
date, system and conversion functions. Jaybird will try to provide an
equivalent of the JDBC function using the built-in capabilities of the
Firebird database. When no equivalent is available, Jaybird will pass
the function call "as is" to the database assuming that it contains all
necessary UDF declarations.

Not all functions described in the JDBC specification have corresponding
built-in functions in Firebird, but are available in the standard UDF
library ``ib_udf``{wj}footnote:[On Windows platform it is represented by the
`ib_udf.dll`, on Linux it is represented by the `libib_udf.so`.] shipped
with Firebird. Jaybird provides a connection parameter
`use_standard_udf` telling the driver to assume that functions from that
UDF are available in the database. In this case Jaybird will convert all
JDBC function calls into the corresponding calls of the UDF functions.

Below you will find the list of JDBC functions and whether they have a
corresponding equivalent in the "built-in" and in the "UDF" modes.

=== Numeric Functions

[cols="2,1,1,4",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|JDBC |built-in |UDF mode |Description

|`ABS(number)` | |X |Absolute value of `number`

|`ACOS(float)` | |X |Arccosine, in radians, of `float`

|`ASIN(float)` | |X |Arcsine, in radians, of `float`

|`ATAN(float)` | |X |Arctangent, in radians, of `float`

|`ATAN2(float1, float2)` | |X |Arctangent, in radians, of `float2` /
`float1`

|`CEILING(number)` | |X |Smallest integer >= `number`

|`COS(float)` | |X |Cosine of `float` radians

|`COT(float)` | |X |Cotangent of `float` radians

|`DEGREES(number)` | | |Degrees in `number` radians

|`EXP(float)` | | |Exponential function of `float`

|`FLOOR(number)` | |X |Largest integer <= `number`

|`LOG(float)` | |X |Base e logarithm of `float`

|`LOG10(float)` | |X |Base 10 logarithm of `float`

|`MOD(integer1, integer2)` | |X |Remainder for `integer1` / `integer2`

|`PI()` | |X |The constant pi

|`POWER(number, power)` | | |`number` raised to (integer) `power`

|`RADIANS(number)` | | |Radians in `number` degrees

|`RAND(integer)` | |`RAND()`{wj}footnote:[Standard UDF library provides
`RAND()` function taking no parameters. The random number generator is
seeded by the current time. There is no function where the seed can be
specified.] |Random floating point for seed `integer`

|`ROUND(number, places)` | | |`number` rounded to `places` places

|`SIGN(number)` | | |-1 to indicate `number` is < 0; 0 to indicate
`number` is = 0; 1 to indicate `number` is > 0

|`SIN(float)` | |X |Sine of `float` radians

|`SQRT(float)` | |X |Square root of float

|`TAN(float)` | |X |Tangent of `float` radians

|`TRUNCATE(number, places)` | | |`number` truncated to `places` places
|=======================================================================

Legend: X – available in this mode.

=== String Functions

[cols="2,1,1,4",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|JDBC |built-in |UDF mode |Description

|`ASCII(string)` | |X |Integer representing the ASCII code value of the
leftmost character in `string`

|`CHAR(code)` | |X |Character with ASCII code value `code`, where `code`
is between 0 and 255

|`CONCAT(string1, string2)` |X |X |Character string formed by appending
`string2` to `string1`; if a string is null, the result is
DBMS-dependent

|`DIFFERENCE(string1, string2)` | | |Integer indicating the difference
between the values returned by the function `SOUNDEX` for `string1` and
`string2`

|`INSERT(string1, start, length, string2)` | | |A character string
formed by deleting `length` characters from `string1` beginning at
`start`, and inserting `string2` into `string1` at `start`

|`LCASE(string)` | |X |Converts all uppercase characters in `string` to
lowercase

|`LEFT(string, count)` |X |X |The `count` leftmost characters from
`string`

|`LENGTH(string)` | |Xfootnote:[The trailing blanks are also counted.]
|Number of characters in `string`, excluding trailing blanks

|`LOCATE(string1, string2[, start])` | | |Position in `string2` of the
first occurrence of `string1`, searching from the beginning of
`string2`; if `start` is specified, the search begins from position
`start`. 0 is returned if `string2` does not contain `string1`. Position
1 is the first character in `string2`

|`LTRIM(string)` | |X |Characters of `string` with leading blank spaces
removed.

|`REPEAT(string, count)` | | |A character string formed by repeating
`string` `count` times

|`REPLACE(string1, string2, string3)` | | |Replaces all occurrences of
`string2` in `string1` with `string3`

|`RIGHT(string, count)` | | |The `count` rightmost characters in
`string`

|`RTRIM(string)` | |X |The characters of `string` with no trailing
blanks.

|`SOUNDEX(string)` | | |A character string, which is data
source-dependent, representing the sound of the words in `string`; this
could be a four-digit SOUNDEX code, a phonetic representation of each
word, etc

|`SPACE(count)` | | |A character string consisting of `count` spaces.

|`SUBSTRING(string, start, length)` |X |X |A character string formed by
extracting `length` characters from `string` beginning at `start`.

|`UCASE(string)` |X |X |Converts all lowercase characters in `string` to
uppercase.
|=======================================================================

Legend: X – available in this mode.

=== Time and Date Functions

[cols="2,1,1,4",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|JDBC |built-in |UDF mode |Description

|`CURDATE()` |X |X |The current date as a date value

|`CURTIME()` |X |X |The current local time as a time value

|`DAYNAME(date)` | | |A character string representing the day component
of `date`; the name for the day is specific to the data source

|`DAYOFMONTH(date)` |X |X |An integer from 1 to 31 representing the day
of the month in `date`

|`DAYOFWEEK(date)` | | |An integer from 1 to 7 representing the day of
the week in `date`; 1 represents Sunday

|`DAYOFYEAR(date)` | | |An integer from 1 to 366 representing the day of
the year in `date`

|`HOUR(time)` |X |X |An integer from 0 to 23 representing the hour
component of `time`

|`MINUTE(time)` |X |X |An integer from 0 to 59 representing the minute
component of `time`

|`MONTH(date)` |X |X |An integer from 1 to 12 representing the month
component of `date`

|`MONTHNAME(date)` | | |A character string representing the month
component of `date`; the name for the month is specific to the data
source

|`NOW()` |X |X |A timestamp value representing the current date and time

|`QUARTER(date)` | | |An integer from 1 to 4 representing the quarter in
`date`; 1 represents January 1 through March 31

|`SECOND(time)` |X |X |An integer from 0 to 59 representing the second
component of `time`

|`TIMESTAMPADD( interval, count, timestamp)` | | |A timestamp calculated
by adding `count` number of `interval`(s) to `timestamp`

|`TIMESTAMPDIFF( interval, timestamp1, timestamp2)` | | |An integer
representing the number of `interval` by which `timestamp2` is greater
than `timestamp1`

|`WEEK(date)` |X |X |An integer from 1 to 53 representing the week of
the year in `date`

|`YEAR(date)` |X |X |An integer representing the year component of
`date`
|=======================================================================

Legend: X – available in this mode.

=== System Functions

[cols="2,1,1,4",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|JDBC |built-in |UDF mode |Description

|`DATABASE()` | | |Name of the database

|`IFNULL(expression, value)` |X |X |`value` if `expression` is null;
`expression` if `expression` is not null

|`USER()` | | |User name in the DBMS
|=======================================================================

Legend: X – available in this mode.

=== Conversion Functions

[cols="2,1,1,4",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|JDBC |built-in |UDF mode |Description

|CONVERT(value, SQL type) |X |X a|
`value` converted to `SQL type` where `SQL type` may be one of the
following SQL types:

* `BIGINT`
* `CHAR`
* `DATE`
* `DECIMAL`
* `OUBLE PRECISION`
* `FLOAT`
* `INTEGER`
* `REAL`
* `SMALLINT`
* `TIME`
* `TIMESTAMP`
* `VARCHAR`

|=======================================================================

Legend: X – available in this mode.

